---
layout: post
title: "Good and Bad GDP Grow Rate"
excerpt:
  "In this document I introduce the notion of good and bad GDP. By using a
  metaphor of good and bad cholesterol, we can start mitigate the negative
  effect of using only the GDP grow rate as an indicator of the shape of an
  economy."
date: 2020-03-28 02-00-00 +0100
categories: blog
---

# Good and Bad GDP Grow Rate

In this document I introduce the notion of good and bad GDP. By using a metaphor
of good and bad cholesterol, we can start mitigate the negative effect of using
only the GDP grow rate as an indicator of the shape of an economy. After the
coronavirus lock down we will see a lot of public economic stimulus packages and
having a better metric for judging the impact of the measures will help
governements make better and more sustainable decisions.

## Gross domestic product (GDP) grow rate

Gross domestic product (GDP) grow rate is one of the most used indicators for
figuring out the shape of an economy. A higher grow rate is considered positive,
a lower one is a sign that the economy is not performing well. A negative is
considered a recession and therefore negative for an economy.

Amartia Sen, Indian Nobel prize for economy, in 1981 has been one of the first
to highlight that the economic grow could also negatively impact a large group
of population and also bring then to starve and die. GDP is a sum of all
economic activities, it is just an indicator of the monetary volume of the
economy. It is an important metric, but in order to assess the health of an
economy other elements are necessary. Unfortunately, the GDP grow rate has a lot
of importance also due to the fact that there is a lack of other easy to
understand parameters. These is not the for companies, where different elements
are considered, like revenue grows, profitability, capital structure, cash flow,
in order express a judgement.

There have been a lot of attempts to create a better metrics that could replace
the GDP to assess a performance of a country, but the success has been very
limited or confined to some countries.

## Good and Bad GDB

I think that in the near term the GDP will remain a powerful indicator and
therefore, instead of trying to replace it, we should try to make it more
expressive by also adding information regarding Good and Bad GDP. These two
elements will not replace the GDP value, but serve to give some sort of better
indication on how the economy is moving.

Distinguishing between activities that are positive or negative should not be
that difficult. Currently the offices of statistic sum all economic activities
in a single value. What we need to do is to separate between:

- Good GDB. Economic activities that are judged positive.
- Negative GDP. Economic activities that are judged negative.
- Neutral GDP. Economic activities that we cannot give a judgement.
- Mixed GDB. Economic activities that contains positive, negative and neutral
  elements.

## Criteria for Good and Bad GDP

With today sophisticated statistics system, it is for sure feasible to separate.
What is needed is a set of criteria that give us an indication if the economic
activity is positive or negative.

A possible approach would be to calculate and divide the bad GDP from the good
one. I think a good indicator would be the fact that the creation of value is
associated with a destruction of value, like for example:

- Destruction of assets. An economic activity, military output, produces a
  destruction of a county.
- Negative impact on the environment. The production or use of the goods brings
  damages to the environment.
- Negative impact on the health. The production or use of the goods brings
  damages and degradation to the heaths of people.

Most economic output would not be classified on the good or bad side, but it
will contain parts of both. IN the statistics they can be separated with
percentages.

It would take some time and different steps before we get a mature system for
classification. But if we do not start, we will continue to refer on the very
limited GDP metric. A good start is for governments to give a mandate to a
university or to the office of statistic to introduce a first system for
calculating the good and bad GDP.

## Use of good and bad GDP

The first use of the good and bad GDP measure should be when setting up economic
stimulus packages. Instead of just trying to grow the economic output each of
the proposed measure should also assess the impact on the good and bad GDP.

End of March 2020, the
[US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to suspends environmental law enforcement, citing coronavirus](https://ww.electrek.co/2020/03/27/epa-suspends-environmental-law-enforcement-citing-coronavirus/).
This measure will have a negative impact on the environment. The increased
economic output should therfore classsified as bad GDP grow.

The good and bad GDP metrics will then help give us a better indication
regarding the impact of measure taken by governments.
